A Virgin's World


By Deanna Dent

She can be found on lowrider cars in Japan, on sweatshirts in Brazil, in paintings in the Philippines and on calendars and key chains in the United States.

Hundreds of thousands of people flock to see her in Mexico City each year. In fact, it would be hard to find a single person in Mexico who does not know who she is.

She goes by the name of Our Lady of Guadalupe or the Virgin of Guadalupe, and her evolution from religious figure to cultural, artistic and political icon reflects the power of faith and popular imagination over geography.

The Virgin’s story begins in 1531.

That is the year she appeared to Juan Diego, an indigenous peasant in Mexico. According to the traditional account the Virgin appeared to Juan Diego several times and her image miraculously appeared on his tilma, or cloak. The cloak, now on display at the Basilica of the Virgin of Guadalupe in Mexico City, attracts pilgrims and visitors from around the world. 

Indigenous people living in Mexico have long mixed their native beliefs with the Catholicism that arrived with Europeans. The Virgin is the epitome of those intertwined traditions.  She looks "mestizo," carrying the "mixed" brown skin of those descended from both indigenous Mexicans and Europeans. 

She spoke to Juan Diego in his native Nauhtl -- the language of the Mexica Indians, and her clothing and decoration reflect both the Roman Catholic religion and the Mexica culture. 

Over the years, the Virgin of Guadalupe became the central focus of worship for many Catholics.  She was credited with ending a deadly epidemic that ravaged Mexico City in 1736–37, after which she was proclaimed patroness of Mexico City. 

She was soon accepted as "Patroness of the Americas," her legend spreading throughout Latin America.  She also became a powerful patriotic symbol in Mexico.

In 1810, Father Miguel Hidalgo started the war for Mexican independence from Spain with his famous "Grito," or yell, "Long live the Virgin of Guadalupe! Death to bad government! Death to the Spaniards!"

Hidalgo led an army whose ranks included Indians, Europeans and mestizos. They marched under banners bearing the Virgin's image.

Again in the early 1900s, the Virgin became the rallying cry for Mexican revolutionaries.  The legendary Emiliano Zapata, much like Hidalgo, carried banners of the Virgin of Guadalupe into battle.

For Mexicans, the Virgin has become a symbol, a way "to identify ourselves," said Alejandro González Villaruell, an anthropologist with the National Museum of Anthropology in Mexico City. It recognizes the value of the common people, and it means “that we identify ourselves more with the Indian side than with the Spanish," he said. 

The Virgin also has become a way for Mexicans to stay in touch with their roots, no matter where they go. The influx of Hispanic immigrants to the United States has given her a strong foothold in the Southwest.  And from there, she has hop scotched the globe, showing up in places as far flung as Iraq and the Philippines.

"The Virgin of Guadalupe jumps the border to say she doesn’t have a passport, she doesn’t have a visa …," Villaruell said. "Is she illegal? Most likely. Would she be Chicano? Who knows. But the Virgin of Guadalupe identifies us.” 

While the Mexican connection has remained strong, other groups have adopted the Virgin as their symbol as well. Those involved in Japan's lowrider car culture have embraced her as an American import from Southern California.  Catholics in the Philippines have built churches in her honor.  Pro-life activists have used her to promote their cause.

Especially in recent years, the Virgin has become an important part of a visual vocabulary for artists, designers, photographers and merchandisers. She shows up in paintings, in tattoos and on clothing, calendars and key chains. 

Today she remains a powerful symbol of Mexican identity. A popular saying among Mexicans is, "While we may not all be Catholics, we are all Guadalupanos," or followers of the Virgin. 

This project explores the story of the Virgin and the many ways in which she impacts people all over the world.


